# Mona: A transparently secure secret manager

## thoughts on key files

Master pass phrases tend to have around [40 bits of entropy](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/a-large-scale-study-of-web-password-habits/?from=http%3A%2F%2Fresearch.microsoft.com%2Fpubs%2F74164%2Fwww2007.pdf), this is not enough to protect users from the NSA.

We can improve the entropy of a users secret key by using a key file.

A key file is a secret key stored in plaintext on each device Mona is installed on.

key derivation with a key file is done by concatenating the master passphrase with the key file contents and feeding the result to pbkdf2
ie.
```
master_pass <- read from users brain
key_file <- read from disk
composite_secret <- master_pass || key_file
encryption_key <- pbkdf2(Sha256, composite_secret, <pbkdf2_iterations>)
```

256 bit key file generated by a secure random number generator will boost the entropy of the master passphrase by 256 bits.

### Syncing a key file
Every device must have the same secret key on each device, we need to make this painless for each user, to do this we perform a key exchange between the user's devices.

The plan: use public key cryptography to store the key file encrypted for each device in the mona git repository

On device initialization, Mona generates a key pair for this device.
private key is stored outside of the Mona repository
write the public key to `$MONA_HOME/devices/<device_name>.pub`
If the devices directory is empty, (ie. there are no devices registered), generate an N bit key_file, store it outside of the mona repository

On every sync:
1. scan the `$MONA_HOME/devices` directory for `devices/<device_name>.pub` files which do not have an accompanying `devices/<device_name>_key_file` file.
2. if such a file is found notify the user and ask for permission to encrypt the key for this device
3. If we have permission, encrypt the key file stored on this device with the `devices/<device_name>.pub` public key using public key cryptography and store it in `devices/<device_name>_key_file`.

If the devices directory is not empty, push the change to the git remotes and periodically pull, we should expect one of the devices to notice the new `<device_name>.pub` file and encrypt the key file for us.
Once we see the expected `<device_name>_key_file` file, decrypt it using the devices private key and store it outside of the mona repository.


## TAI
- synchronizing access to $MONA_HOME, this is custom to each client
- Password strength estimation: https://github.com/tsyrogit/zxcvbn-c
- look into what is required to make sure secrets are not left stored in memory after deallocation (also paging to disk...)

## Metadata File
For each encrypted file {encrypted_file_path} we have {encrypted_file_path}.toml which
describes how {encrypted_file_path} was encrypted.

_Metadata Format:_

```toml
#<garble>.toml
#  - accompanying file to the encrypted file with path: <garble>
version = "0.0.1"          # mona client version number

[plaintext]
min_bits = 1024            # plaintext is padded to this min bit length

[pbkdf2]
algo = "Sha256"            # digest algo used by pbkdf2
iters = 1000000            # iterations done by pbkdf2
salt = "4ZHmDMPkbOfpnKCh"  # salt given to pbkdf2

[aead]
algo = "ChaCha20-Poly1305" # AEAD block cipher algo
nonce = "tL8UZ79l0wWtzmfj" # nonce which was used to encrypt matching file
keylen = 256               # length of secret key which was used to encrypt

[paranoid]
# Extra security for the *extra* paranoid
#
# These options are here to provide an attempt at future proofing encrypted data
# against unknown attacks on current crypto algorithms.
#
# ! Given current understanding of crypto these are NOT REQUIRED FOR A SECURE SYSTEM.

# Simple Multiple Encryption is done using the method described by Bruce Schneier:
# - generate a random <pad> of the same size of the plaintext
# - XOR the plaintext with the <pad> resulting in a <ciphertext1>.
# - Encrypt the <pad> with <cipher1> and key1 -> <ciphertext2>
# - encrypt <ciphertext1> with <cipher1> and key2 -> <ciphertext3>
# - ciphertext4 = <ciphertext2>|<ciphertext3>
# A cryptanalyst must break both ciphers to get any information
# This will, however, have the drawback of making the ciphertext twice as long as the original plaintext.
# 
# This process can be repeated with a third cipher by treating <ciphertext4> as plaintext and going through the same process again
simple_multiple_encryption = "TBD" # not implemented yet

# Cascading Encryption:
# ciphertext = cipher<N>(key<N>, cipher<N-1>(key<N-1>..cipher1(key1, plaintext)...))
# -- nesting different ciphers all with *unique* keys
cascading_encryption = "TBD"       # not implemented yet
```

## AEAD nonce
$MONA_HOME/burned_nonces file contains a list of nonces which have
previously been used to encrypt files.

A new nonce must be checked against this list to verify it has never been used to
encrypt a file.

## Manifest
Encrypted file containing lookup information about stored secrets.

### Manifest Format
A list of entries stored in git-db with their associated data

```toml
[[entries]]
path = "misc/new.ycombinator.com"
tags = "hacker/news/social/ycombinator"
garbled_path = "lj01g7OD8g30F6X9"

[[entries]]
path = "misc/www.facebook.com"
tags = ["facebook", "social"]
garbled_path = "-If9my6XE9T7mGJ9"

[[entries]]
path = "misc/mail.protonmail.com"
tags = ["mail", "protonmail", "social"]
garbled_path = "lj01g7OD8g30F6X9"

[[entries]]
path = "work/mona/design.md"
tags = []
garbled_path = "lj01g7OD8g30F6X9"
```

## Thoughts on secure browser crypto
- mobile app stores offline cache of website ssl certificate.

1. user visits https://mona.com/web (enforce ssl)
2. user is told to take out his mobile phone and follow untrusted client instructions
3. user is on app:
   - user is given instructions on how to pull up fingerprint
   - app has OCR feature to extract fingerprint -> compares against cache
   - if different: warn user that this connection has been MITM'ed
   - if matches: tell user the connection is secure
   - TAI: we don't really need authenticity, we need content integrity

4. if user has internet access from phone:
   - website generates a private/public key pair
   - website encodes public key in qr code
   - website displays qr code and starts polling backend for encrypted metadata file
   - user uses mobile app to take picture of qr code, decodes public key
   - app decrypts metadata and re-encrypts metadata file using public key
   - app sends encrypted metadata to backend
   - website polling finds encrypted metadata and fetches it
   - website decrypts metadata using private key
   - website shows metadata and allows user to search for the secret they need
   - user selects secret, website encodes secret identifier in QR code
   - mobile app is used to decode QR code, and as before it decrypts and re-encrypts secret using stored public key, posts to backend
   - website polls for secret and fetches and decrypts it.

5. if user has no internet access from phone, warn user about possibility of keylongers, if user agrees to accept the risk, prompt user for master passphrase and have the website clone the git repository into memory and decrypt things as needed client side.

## GIT DB

_Encrypted key value store built on top of Git._

```
key: a user chosen file path
value: binary blob
```

A blob is stored on disk by two files with the same garbled path prefix

```
<garble>/<garble>      # encrypted data
<garble>/<garble>.toml # instructions how to decrypt data
```

```
git_db_root/
├── .git/...
├── <garble>/
│   ├── <garble>      # The encrypted data
│   └── <garble>.toml # Plaintext TOML file with encryption details
│...
```

A mapping from the key (the user provided lookup path) and the garbled path is stored in an encrypted manifest file in the root directory

```
git_db_root/
├── .git/...
├── manifest         # encrypted manifest
├── manifest.toml    # plaintext manifest encryption details
│...
```

Each entry in the Git DB has an entry in the manifest that looks similar to:

```toml
[[entries]]
path = ["path", "to", "file.txt"]    # normalized form of 'path/to/file.txt'
tags = ["optional", "tags", "for", "queries"]
garbled_path = ["<garble>", "<garble>"] # randomly generated path
```

_how git db looks up a file:_
1. git-db decrypts manifest with instrucrions from "manifest.toml"
2. scan entries for a path matching their <lookup path>
3. if match found, extract matching <garbled path>.
5. git-db decrypts the <garbled path> file with instructions from <garbled path>.toml

_notes:_
- garbled path is required to hide information leaked by structure of repository
- keys are derived using some varient of kdf(pass, salt). Per blob salt will give us
  a unique secret key for each encrypted blob ==> sad days for NSA
- nothing is stopping users from using different passwords to encrypt seperate files

